---
title: Are you feeling depleted from burnout?
cover: burnout.webp
featured: true
date: 2025-11-24 00:00:00
tags:
- Mental Health
- Productivity
- Processes
- Personal Development
creditSource: Freepik AI
creditLink: https://www.freepik.com/
abstract: >
  Chronic stress releases adrenaline and cortisol, but when your brain stays stuck in that state. Adrenaline triggers fight-or-flight, cortisol weakens immunity and shrinks part of the hippocampus, and prolonged pressure increases the risk of anxiety, depression, and neurodegenerative disease. When you finish a major stressful push and get sick, that’s your body demanding real recovery — a human system with limits, not an infinite cloud service.
---

Deplete `pronounce:dɪˈpliːt` in terms of burnout relates to the primary characteristic of exhaustion and a loss of energy resulting from chronic, unmanaged stress.
It's a real beast :disappointed: affecting you physically, emotionally, and mentally.

## The impact

When you are stressed, your body tries to survive. Long-term stress is downright harmful to you and your brain :brain:.

- Adrenaline is released which triggers your fight-or-flight response.
  It increases your heart rate, blood pressure, and anxiety levels.
- Cortisol is released in high quantities over time. It weakens your memory, focus, immunity, and shrinks part of your hippocampus.
  Learning new things becomes harder.
- Your nervous system is on high alert.
  This disrupts your sleep, makes you heal slower, and traps you in a cycle of stress.
- Your amygdala is affected.
  This leads to increased anxiety, your emotions are harder to regulate and you may struggle to remember things.
- Your prefrontal cortex is affected. This leads to difficulties in focus and making decisions.
  It becomes harder to concentrate when trying to solve problems.
- Your blood-brain barrier weakens.
  It allows inflammatory molecules, stress-related toxins, and metabolic waste to enter the brain.
  These substances trigger inflammation, disrupt normal signalling, and damage sensitive brain cells.
- Essential neurotransmitters, like serotonin and dopamine, are depleted.
  They are crucial for regulating your mood, and cognitive function.
  Your brain will struggle to process information, interpret the world, and guide your behavior.
- Chronic stress increases your chances of developing depression, anxiety disorders, and neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's.

Woah :scream: this is bad! Again for emphasis :scream:
Working under prolonged high pressure is not sustainable.
How are you able to figure out what is going wrong in complex systems and what to do next?

Have you ever noticed that after finishing a big, stressful project you actually get sick?
That’s your body screaming for real recovery.

If this feels familiar, it’s not failure — it’s feedback. Listen to it.

## The reality for software engineers

As software engineers, we need to think deeply for hours at a time.
While doctors refer to anatomy in their practice and lawyers reference the law, software engineers try to stay current with the ever-evolving ecosystem of tools, languages, frameworks, and best practices, often working in chaotic, high-pressure environments, often wearing many hats at the same time. _At least I do._

Since we don't have a stable, authoritative body of rules to lean on, it becomes impractical and unrealistic.
I've noticed many companies expect software engineers to be experts in almost everything.
I have exposure to a broad set of skills but I don't consider myself an expert in any of them.
My expertise lies in figuring out what to draw from my toolbox to solve problems effectively.

What makes this worse is that the business world has super demanding expectations of software delivery with:

- Unrealistic deadlines
- Vague product specs and scope creep
- Last-minute business pivots
- Delivery pressure without proper discovery
- Estimation stress
- Tech debt landmines
- Disconnect between customers and engineering

We need to be on-call to handle production issues which are hidden in the guts of the system and is so confusing that it could take hours or days to figure out, let alone fix.
In complex and distributed systems, the root cause may be buried deep within layers of infrastructure, services, and dependencies.

Our brains are our bread and butter.
We need to protect ourselves from the slow erosion of our health.

## My story

Before we dive into the strategies, I want to share why this is important to me.

I write about this today because I have experienced burnout multiple times over the past two decades.
One thing I've learned is that chaos will be chaos.
The only thing I can control is myself and the influence that I have on the chaos.
I am responsible for my own well-being.

My downfall was brought about by a deep empathy that pushed me to keep people happy, and the business afloat.
I took on responsibilities that were not mine to bear alone.

I kept pushing myself to help with production incidents for months at a time, without taking breaks, working late nights, weekends, and public holidays.
This obsession wasn't an expectation from anyone else.
I wasn't being micromanaged or pressured by leadership.
I just did it because I cared too much.

Now, I'm not saying that you should stop caring.
I'm advocating for a drive to deliver excellence and make an impact, but without sacrificing your own health and well-being.

It got so bad that I was exhausted.
I couldn't think straight.
I started making mistakes.
I felt like I was drowning in a sea of chaos.
I lost motivation and purpose, and I started feeling disconnected.
I eventually hit a wall and had to take a step back to recover.
I decided to change jobs.

> The thing is, the change won't necessarily fix much, since the source of the problem is deep within me.
> So, I need to be intentional about preventing burnout.

## Strategies to prevent burnout

I've developed a set of strategies to help me prevent burnout.
They have been curated from deep reflection and perspective.
I've also been doing extensive research with ChatGPT and a little bit of Claude, and have hand-picked what has resonated with me.

### Change your environment

If you find yourself in a constant state of high-pressure, you need to speak up.
Don't assume that no one will hear you out or think you're weak.
In fact, it takes courage and strength to admit that something isn't right.
Be brave. :muscle:

Analyze the issues, and reach out to leadership, HR, or even a trusted mentor.
Explain the situation and how it is affecting you or your team.
Chances are that people are compassionate and will listen.
Offer solutions and alternatives to improve the situation.

When you have exhausted all options, you should consider moving on.

### Learn to prioritize well

I watched a TED talk by Darria Long, an ER doctor, who said that we should stop calling our days "Crazy Busy."
Her message had a profound impact on me. She contrasts the term "Crazy Busy" with "Ready Mode."
That means that no matter what comes your way, you are ready to handle it.

This talk is epic! :rocket:, I strongly suggest you watch it.

`youtube:https://www.youtube.com/embed/nLjchFPvcQo`

The bottom line is to learn to triage relentlessly.
If you can't differentiate between what is critical and what is not, then everything remains critical and you are in an awful spot.

The categories ERs use are listed below and translated to how we can apply them to software engineering work:

- `badge:className=red-badge,text=Red` :sos: Immediately life-threatening (Critical)
- `badge:className=yellow-badge,text=Yellow` :warning: Serious but not immediately life-threatening (Important)
- `badge:className=green-badge,text=Green` :bell: Minor (Can wait / Noise)
- `badge:className=black-badge,text=Black` :x: Nothing you can do about it (Write-off)

Triage is not solving everything, doing things in the order of who shouts loudest, or finishing the whole backlog.
When we prioritize effectively, we create breathing room for deep thinking, reduce context switching, and minimize the cognitive load on our brains.

#### Critical

If something is critical, it could be that there is a production outage, money isn't flowing in, customer data is corrupted, or there is a regulatory breach.

#### Important

If something is important, it does require attention, but the world does't burn if handled later.
This can include performance issues, flaky tests, business requests with deadlines, or backlog items that unblock others.

#### Can wait / Noise

You get noise, which could be nice to do, but absolutely not urgent such as low-impact bugs, the refactor of a random file that can be deferred to later, “Can we just tweak the UI a bit?”, or “I noticed a typo.”

#### Write-off tasks

Write-offs are typically things that are out of your control, or have so much overhead that it is not worth the effort.

### Create a working agreement

Find out what is expected of you and your team from leadership, and stakeholders.
Ensure the expectations are feasible, realistic, and sustainable.
Chances are that you are expecting too much of yourself.

Get into a working agreement with your team and leadership.
Set realistic expectations and boundaries to protect individual contributors from overload.
Each person only has so much capacity each day.
Figure out how each team member works best and empower yourselves to create an effective and fair agreement.

Document your working agreement and share it within your business.
This way everyone has access to it and can be on the same page as your team.
Your working agreement can include:

- Clearly defined responsibilities and roles within the team.
- Response times for asynchronous messages and emails.
- Availability for meetings and deep work.
- Turnaround times for tasks and projects.
- Lunch breaks. Spread the time, to ensure higher availability throughout the day.
- Boundaries for work hours and after-hours communication.
- Prioritization of tasks and projects.

Revisit your working agreement regularly to ensure it remains relevant and effective.

### Be a systems thinker

Don’t isolate your knowledge to your team’s domain alone.
Understand the business as a whole.
Explore who is involved, the products that are offered, and the customers that are served.
This broader understanding will help you determine the impact of your work, and you will know when you are stepping on cross-domain toes.

The concept of "when I do this, it affects that" is crucial to understanding complex and distributed systems.
This could reduce the impact of introducing changes that break system domains.

### Strategically delegate

Protect yourself by not playing hero, and trying to do everything alone.
Instead, delegate tasks that can be handled by other team members, to free up your mental bandwidth.

This doesn't mean that you should be dumping work on others, but rather strategically distributing tasks as a team.
Your responsibilities should be shared, and each member should be entrusted to take ownership of their particular tasks and areas.

### Distribute ownership

Owning it is when you work with authority, initiative, and accountability.
Unfortunately, you can't always control the outcome or its success.
Ownership should also be at a team level to protect the mental energy of individual contributors.
Work together to set clear boundaries on what is owned by whom, and on the responsibilities that are shared.

### Respect your time and the time of others

Your time is the most valuable resource you have. You have 86,400 seconds a day, typically 28,800 of those are an 8-hour workday.
Use these seconds :clock1: wisely.

- Be attuned to your productivity rhythms, and schedule your work to correspond with peak performance hours.
- Drop the concept of multi-tasking and context-switching. You will make mistakes and overwhelm yourself.
- Time-box your work and take regular breaks to recharge. You can use Pomodoro intervals, your calendar, or any time management technique that suits you.
- Avoid unnecessary meetings and interruptions. Protect your deep work time. Use tools like "Do Not Disturb" modes, status indicators, or dedicated focus time slots.
- Make sure your team knows when you are unavailable so that they can respect your time and you can manage their expectations.
- Respect topics and agendas in meetings and don't digress or deviate from their purpose.
- Respect the time of the meeting. Don't overrun it.
- Go to the bathroom! :toilet: Your kidneys will thank you for it.

### Stop overworking

Have you ever been stuck on a problem that you just couldn't solve immediately?
You'd spin for hours, trying to figure it out, but nothing seems to work.

Pause and step back.
Take a break, go for a walk, take a shower, or get a good night's sleep.
Trust your brain to work on the problem in the background.
Chances are, that you will find a solution with a fresher perspective.

When time is not on your side, rope other people in to get help.
Don’t sit idly and worry about it.
You may be surprised to solve it because of a fresh pair of eyes, or rubber duck debugging.

Putting in prolonged or extra hours, skipping breaks, having back-to-back meetings, and working through lunch are crucial mistakes.
Your brain needs downtime to recharge, and so do you.

### Say no when you need to

Learning to say no is not a sign of weakness.
It means no disrespect to the person asking, and it protects your time, energy, and mental well-being.

When unscoped work comes your way, evaluate it against impact, your current priorities, capacity, deadlines, and your work agreement.
If you can't take it on, creatively find alternatives, defer it, negotiate, suggest someone else, or simply say no — and why.
Document your decisions and agreements in your ticket management system so that you have a living document that tracks the progress of that request.

Systems thinking within your team and business will help you make more informed decisions about taking on or declining work.

### Write things down

Your brain is not a storage device, and other people need context.
Use your ticketing system as living documentation of what is happening, what has been done, and what needs to be done.
Write down your thoughts, ideas, and decisions so that you can offload your brain, reduce cognitive load, reference them later, and help anyone else who refers to it.

Your pull requests should have clear descriptions, rationales, and a summary of the ticket you are working on, so that anyone can understand the context of the change.
Sometimes tickets are deleted, or people don't have access to them, so you don't want to rely on solely linking to the ticket.

### Work asynchronously

Remote teams typically work asynchronously because they are distributed across various locations and time zones.
Co-located teams can benefit from asynchronous communication.

Create a safe space for people to communicate without pressure of making mistakes.
Actively encourage questions, feedback, and discussions.

Consider if meetings should be in realtime or not.
If it should be realtime, the agenda is non-negotiable.
Set one and stick to it, and honor the time of the meeting.
Keep a summary of the meeting to refer back to it later.
You can take meeting notes (you can leverage AI); and document decisions (the _"why"_ is crucial), action items, and next steps.

Effectively use collaboration tools that are searchable, organized, and accessible to everyone in your business.
Use these tools to share updates, progress, and feedback without needing to be present in real-time.
This is searchable and easy to reference later.

Not everything can be asynchronous.
Face time creates a human connection which is important for bonding, trust, and rapport, and preventing feelings of isolation.
Set up realtime meetings when absolutely necessary for conflict resolution, alignment, retrospectives, or emotionally complex topics.

## Conclusion

Chronic stress slowly wears down your physical, emotional, and mental energy.
It weakens the parts of your brain you rely on every day and makes it harder to think clearly, stay focused, and feel grounded.

As software engineers, we’re especially prone to burnout.
Our work demands deep thinking, constant learning, juggling expectations, and solving complex problems—often under pressure and with limited clarity.
It’s a lot for any human brain to sustain.

The strategies above come from experience, reflection, and hard lessons.
If even one of them resonates with you, let it support you in protecting your energy and navigating your career more sustainably.

Take care of yourself.
Your health comes first.
